# Plot Points

* Tuvolo has his dream
* Meets the stag
* Meets the witch
* Tests, Allies, Enemies
* The Ordeal
* The Road Back

## The Ordinary World

The Ordinary World allows us to get to know the Hero and identify with him
before the Journey begins. Since the audience usually experiences the Journey
through the Hero’s eyes, we must be able to relate to him. The Ordinary World
gives us the opportunity to identify with the Hero’s drives, urges, and
problems, while showing unique characteristics and flaws that make him
three-dimensional. The Hero’s Inner and Outer Problems may be established,
although these can change depending upon the demands of the Journey. Dr. Richard
Kimble’s problems in his Ordinary World change drastically when he enters his
Special World as a fugitive of justice.

Every story involves a problem or Central Dramatic Question that disrupts the
Ordinary World. The Hero must enter the Special World to solve the problem,
answer the dramatic question, and return balance. The Ordinary World allows the
storyteller to contrast the Ordinary and Special worlds. The ordinary World is
the Hero’s home, the safe haven upon which the Special World and the Journey’s
outcome must be compared. Areas of contrast may include the Special World’s
physical and emotional characteristics, its rules and inhabitants, as well as
the Hero’s actions and growth while traveling through this Special World.

## The Call to Adventure

The Call to Adventure sets the story rolling by disrupting the comfort of the
Hero’s Ordinary World, presenting a challenge or quest that must be undertaken.
The Call throws the Ordinary World off balance, and establishes the stakes
involved if the challenge is rejected. Often delivered by the Herald archetype,
the Call to Adventure can take a multitude of forms, including: a message or
announcement (The African Queen), a sudden storm (Home Alone), the arrival of
the villain (High Noon), a death (Jaws, Some Like it Hot), an abduction (Star
Wars), a man’s dying words (Citizen Kane). The Hero may need a Succession of
Calls before finally realizing that a challenge must be met, or that his only
means of escape is the Special World. Many times the Hero needs to choose
between two Conflicting Calls.

## Refusal of the Call

A Hero Refuses the Journey because of fears and insecurities that have surfaced
from the Call to Adventure. The Hero is not willing to make changes, preferring
the safe haven of the Ordinary World. The Refusal of the Call becomes an
essential Stage that communicates the risks involved in the Journey that lies
ahead. Without risks and danger or the likelihood of failure, the audience will
not be compelled to be a part of the Hero’s Journey.

Although an eager or Willing Hero may skip the Refusal Stage, the Hero’s Allies
or Threshold Guardians may still express the fears and risks involved (Dances
With Wolves). In Horror and Thriller, the frightening and forbidding nature of
the Special World can lead the Hero to be repeatedly “called” to the Adventure
that he continues to refuse. Each Call and Refusal must escalate the stakes,
until the Hero has no choice but to accept the Call

## Meeting the Mentor

The Hero Meets a Mentor to gain confidence, insight, advice, training, or
magical gifts to overcome the initial fears and face the threshold of the
adventure.

A Hero may not wish to rush into a Special World blindly and, therefore, seeks
the experience and wisdom of someone who has been there before. This Mentor has
survived to provide the essential lessons and training needed to better face the
Journey’s Tests and Ordeals. The Mentor may be a physical person, or an object
such as a map, a logbook, or hieroglyphics. In Westerns and Detective stories,
the Hero may hold an Inner Mentor, a strong code of honor or justice that guides
him through the Journey.

## Crossing the Threshold

Crossing the Threshold signifies that the Hero has finally committed to the
Journey. He is prepared to cross the gateway that separates the Ordinary World
from the Special World. The Crossing may require more than accepting one’s
fears, a map, or a swift kick in the rear from a Mentor. The Hero must confront
an event that forces him to commit to entering the Special World, from which
there is no turning back.

The Event will re-establish the Central Dramatic Question that propels the story
forward. The Event will directly affect the Hero, raising the stakes and forcing
some action.

Outside forces may push the Hero ahead, such as an abduction of someone close to
the Hero (The Searchers). A Chase may push the Hero to the brink, presenting no
choice but to commit (Some Like It Hot). The Hero’s place in his Ordinary World
may be usurped by a penguin (The Wrong Trousers), or the Hero may cross the
threshold with guns blazing and whip cracking (Raiders of the Lost Ark).

Internal forces may also push the Hero to accept his Special World. Conrad
finally decides to see a therapist (Ordinary People). Belle sacrifices herself
in exchange for her father’s freedom (Beauty and the Beast). Alvy and Annie
agree to go out on their first date (Annie Hall).

## Tests, Allies, Enemies

Having crossed the Threshold, the Hero faces Tests, encounters Allies, confronts
Enemies, and learns the rules of the Special World. This Stage is important for
Hero and Audience alike. Whether entering the imaginary world of a future
society or the emotional realm of romantic love, the Test Stage is our first
look at the Special World and how its conditions and inhabitants contrast with
the Hero’s Ordinary World.

The Hero needs to find out who can be trusted. Allies are earned, a Sidekick may
join up, or an entire Hero Team forged. Enemies and Villains are encountered.
A Rival to the Hero’s goal may reveal himself. The Hero must prepare himself for
the greater Ordeals yet to come and needs this Stage to Test his skills and
powers, or perhaps seek further training from the Mentor. This Initiation into
the Special World also

Tests the Hero’s commitment to the Journey, and questions whether he can succeed.

## Approach to the Inmost Cave

The Hero must make the preparations needed to Approach the Inmost Cave that
leads to the Journey’s heart, or central Ordeal. Maps may be reviewed, attacks
planned, a reconnaissance launched, and possibly the Enemy’s forces whittled
down, before the Hero can face his greatest fear or the supreme danger lurking
in the Special World. The confident Hero may bypass these preparations and make
a bold Approach to the Inmost Cave.

The Hero has survived his descent into the Special World. He has earned his
place and may need to take a break for a cigarette, a joke, or a romance, before
facing the Ordeal. A Hero’s Team may have hit setbacks during the Tests, and the
Approach is necessary to reorganize the depleted ranks, remember the dead and
wounded, and rekindle morale with a Hero’s or Mentor’s rally cry.

The Approach may signal a Ticking Clock or a heightening of the stakes. In
Romantic Comedy, the Approach may force the lovers to question commitment; one
partner may express the need for marriage.

## The Ordeal

The Hero engages in the Ordeal, the central life-or-death crisis, during which
he faces his greatest fear, confronts this most difficult challenge, and
experiences “death”. His Journey teeters on the brink of failure. Indy and
Marion are sealed in the Well of the Souls; Annie and Alvy have broken up. And
the audience watches in suspense wondering whether the Hero will survive. The
Ordeal is the central, essential, and magical Stage of any Journey. Only through
“death” can the Hero be reborn, experiencing a resurrection that grants greater
powers or insight to see the Journey to the end.

The Hero may directly taste death, or witness the death of an Ally or Mentor or,
even worse, directly cause that death. The Ordeal may pit Hero against Shadow or
Villain, and the Hero’s failure heightens the stakes and questions the Journey’s
success (Die Hard). The Hero may have the power to defeat a Villain in the
Ordeal, only to have to face greater forces in the Journey’s second half.

In Romantic Comedies, death can mean the break-up of the relationship. In
Romance, a Crisis of the heart can be a love scene—the physical act of love is
a type of “death” or surrender. The Crisis of the Heart can also be a moment
when a Shapeshifting lover suddenly reveals a dark side that attempts to destroy
the Hero (Casablanca).

## Reward

The Hero has survived death, overcome his greatest fear, slain the dragon, or
weathered the Crisis of the Heart, and now earns the Reward that he sought. The
Hero’s Reward comes in many forms: a magical sword, an elixir, greater knowledge
or insight, reconciliation with a lover. Whatever the treasure, the Hero has
earned the right to celebrate. Celebration not only allows the Hero to replenish
his or her energy, but also gives the audience a moment to catch their breath
before the Journey resumes to its climax and resolution.

The Hero may have earned the Reward outright, or the Hero may have seen no
option but to steal it. The Hero may rationalize the Elixir theft, having paid
for it with the Tests and Ordeals thus far. But the consequences of the theft
must be confronted as the Shadow forces race to reclaim the Elixir that must not
see the light of the Ordinary World.

## The Road Back

The Hero must finally recommit to completing the Journey and accept the Road
Back to the Ordinary World. A Hero’s success in the Special World may make it
difficult to return. Like Crossing the Threshold, The Road Back, needs an event
that will push the Hero through the Threshold, back into the Ordinary World.

The Event should re-establish the Central Dramatic Question, pushing the Hero to
action and heightening the stakes. Like any strong turning point, the action
initiating the Road Back could change the direction of the story. The Hero may
need a force to Chase her out of the Special World (Thelma and Louise).
A Ticking Clock threatening destruction or death in the Ordinary World may be
set in motion (Home Alone). The Villain may have recovered the Elixir and must
be stopped (Raiders of the Lost Ark). The Event may be an internal decision that
must be made by the Hero. In Comedies, a Hero may be trying to juggle
conflicting Journeys, and one must finally be sacrificed (Some Like It Hot). In
Romance and Action Adventure, the Road Back may be a moment when the Hero must
choose between the Journey of a Higher Cause versus the personal Journey of the
Heart (Beauty and the Beast).

## The Resurrection

The Hero faces the Resurrection, his most dangerous meeting with death. This
final life-and-death Ordeal shows that the Hero has maintained and can apply all
that he has brought back to the Ordinary World. This Ordeal and Resurrection can
represent a “cleansing” or purification that must occur now that the Hero has
emerged from the land of the dead. The Hero is reborn or transformed with the
attributes of his Ordinary self in addition to the lessons and insights from the
characters that he has met along the road.

The Resurrection may be a physical Ordeal, or final showdown between Hero and
Shadow; however, the Ticking Clock of the Road Back has been set. This battle is
for much more than the Hero’s life. Other lives, or an entire world may be at
stake and the Hero must now prove that he has achieved Heroic Status and
willingly accept his sacrifice for the benefit of the Ordinary World.

Other Allies may come to the last-minute rescue to lend assistance, but in the
end the Hero must rise to the sacrifice at hand. He must deliver the blow that
destroys the Death Star (Star Wars), or offer his hand and accept the “magic”
Elixir of love (Sleepless in Seattle)
